# Introducing the Long Discourses

The Dīgha Nikāya is the first of the four main collections in the Sutta Piṭaka of the Pali Canon (*tipiṭaka*). It is translated here as <cite>Long Discourses</cite>. As the title suggests, its discourses are somewhat longer than those of other *nikāyas*. There are, however, only 34 discourses in the collection, so despite the length of the individual discourses, the collection as a whole is by far the shortest of the *nikāyas*.

It is distinguished from the other *nikāyas* by its more developed and elaborate literary forms. Outgrowing the bare and direct style of most of the early texts, here the extra length offers space for narratives and doctrinal expositions to find a fuller expression. This is an early hint at how the literary form of Buddhist texts was to develop in later years, moving towards expansiveness and abundance.

It is no coincidence that these elaborate texts are often addressed to the brahmins, who were the self-proclaimed spiritual leaders of the time. The brahmins were the custodians of the most sophisticated texts in ancient India up to this time—the Vedas. It seems that one aim of the Dīgha was to impress and convert such learned men. Such discourses offer a wide range of examples of how the Buddha related to those of other religious paths.

Another overriding theme of the Dīgha is the passing away of the Buddha. The centerpiece of the collection is DN 16, the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna Sutta</cite>, a discourse of unrivaled importance. This presents the last journey of the Buddha, wandering in unhurried stages from town to town, each step bringing him closer to his passing. In the very length of the text, recording so many minutiae of the journey, we can sense a longing to draw out those last precious days as far as possible.

## How the Dīgha is Organized

The 34 discourses are grouped in three *vaggas*. The first *vagga* consists of thirteen discourses, each of which includes a lengthy passage on the spiritual practice of a monastic, known as the Gradual Training (*anupubbasikkhā*).

In the second *vagga* we find a number of discourses of a more biographical nature. DN 15 <cite>Mahāpadāna</cite> tells of past Buddhas, while DN 16 <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> tells of Siddhattha’s last days. In addition, a number of other discourses in this section are closely related to the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>. I will discuss this cycle further below.

The final *vagga* is more miscellaneous. It includes long poetic sections, doctrinal compilations—some of which are precursors to the Abhidhamma—and narratives that are often humorous and occasionally border on farce.

## The Gradual Training

The Gradual Training sets out the steps taken by a Buddhist renunciate on their path. It begins with the arising of a Buddha in the world. Hearing the Buddha’s teaching, a person reflects on how best it can be applied to their own life and experiences. Realizing that “the household life is cramped and dirty, but the life of one gone forth is wide open”, they give up their worldly possessions and attachments, don the ochre robe of a Buddhist mendicant, and undertake a life of morality, simplicity, and meditation. Proceeding step by step to ever more advanced practices, they eventually enter into deep meditative absorption (*jhāna*) before realizing the four noble truths in their own experience and finding true freedom.

The Gradual Training is an expansion of the threefold training (*tisso sikkhā*): ethics (*sīla*), meditative immersion (*samādhi*), and wisdom (*paññā*). At AN 3.89 the three trainings are defined: ethics (in a monastic context) requires keeping the monastic rules; meditative immersion is the four absorptions; and wisdom is the understanding of the four noble truths. This teaching is distributed widely throughout the early Buddhist texts. In the Dīgha, for example, it is found in the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> as a standard teaching repeated by the Buddha at many of the stops on his journey. A series of shorter discourses on this subject may be found in the Samaṇa Vagga of the Aṅguttara (AN 3.81–91).

This brief overview of the path is explained more fully in the Gradual Training, which explains each of the three trainings in considerable detail. This longer exposition appears to have been the original teaching on the overall lifestyle, practices, and aims of the Buddha’s mendicant followers. It seems that the Buddha preferred to encourage his monastics by exhorting them to follow the highest ideals of conduct and meditation. Only reluctantly did he set up the legal system of the Vinaya texts, with its procedures and punishments.

The Gradual Training is found, in somewhat varying forms, in the Majjhima (MN 27, MN 51, MN 38, MN 39, MN 53, MN 107, MN 125), the Aṅguttara (AN 4.198, AN 10.99), and even the Abhidhamma (Vb 12, Pp 2.4#114). Curiously enough, however, it is not found among the collected discourses on the path found in the last book of the Saṁyutta.

The Dīgha makes up for this lack by placing a *vagga* of thirteen discourses right at the start, all of them featuring the Gradual Training. This is called the Sīlakkhandhavagga, the “Chapter on the Aggregate of Ethics”. Despite the title, however, these texts treat the full training on ethics, meditative immersion, and wisdom.

Due to the repetition, the texts invariably abbreviate all the expositions except for the first two discourses. It should be remembered, however, that this is merely a consequence of how the Theravādin tradition arranged these texts. In the Sanskrit and Chinese Dīrghāgamas, the texts in this section are arranged differently, and different suttas are either expanded or abbreviated accordingly.

While the focus is firmly on monastic life, the general principles hold good for everyone, and indeed at MN 53 <cite>Sekha</cite> Ānanda teaches essentially the same path to a lay audience. In the Sīlakkhandhavagga, although the training for monastics is the focus, most of the discourses are in fact addressed to lay people, almost all of whom are brahmins. The purpose is to impress on them the power and transformative potential of inner development and meditation, as contrasted with a spiritual life consisting in rituals and prayers.

Just as the Gradual Training is built from the kernel of the threefold training, the code of monastic ethics is built from the core principles of basic precepts. The most fundamental precept for everyone in Buddhism is non-violence, to refrain from killing any creature, however small.

## How to Build a Long Discourse

There are over a thousand discourses recorded in each of the Aṅguttara and the Saṁyutta Nikāyas, but only 34 long texts recorded in the Dīgha. The relatively short texts of the Aṅguttara and the Saṁyutta Nikāyas are reminiscent of the pre-Buddhist Upanishads, especially the Brahadarannyaka and Chandogya. These consist of a series of mostly independent passages, each episode covering no more than a few pages, and assembled into a much larger text. They are recollections of concise and focused teachings at certain times and places by certain people. It would seem, then, from the overwhelming majority of contemporary texts both Buddhist and Brahmanical, that the short discourse or dialogue was the standard format.

How were these long texts constructed? Why? And for whom? Let us approach these questions by briefly considering a few different forms employed in the Dīgha.

### Inherently Complex Subjects

The first kind of long discourse that I will note here is that which is long because the subject matter is inherently complex and demands a lengthy explanation. In most cases the Buddha was a master of presenting subjects in both pithy and detailed forms. Nevertheless, there are a few discourses whose subject matter requires an extensive treatment.

As noted above, the first thirteen discourses all include a long passage on the Gradual Training. In some cases—for example DN 6 <cite>Mahāli</cite> and DN 7 <cite>Jāliya</cite>—the discourse consists of little more than this passage, with a simple narrative background and some short extra teachings. So it seems that the presence of the long Gradual Training section was itself enough to qualify a discourse as “long”. Since this passage aims to provide a detailed guide to the whole of the renunciate spiritual life, from hearing the teaching to full awakening, the length is inherent in the subject matter. True, it is taught more briefly elsewhere, but even in those cases it tends to be somewhat long, and there was clearly a tendency to make it more inclusive.

In other cases the Gradual Training is taught in the middle of a discourse that is already quite extensive. Such is the case with DN 1 <cite>Brahmajala</cite>, which sets forth a network of 62 kinds of wrong view. Here, the nature of the subject matter is so extensive and complex that a shorter exposition would not do it justice. Indeed, when this teaching is mentioned in shorter discourses, it is not summarized, but the reader is referred rather to the full text.

### Compilations

Far more common than inherently lengthy teachings are the compilations. In such cases, a long text is compiled by adding together a series of short passages. Such passages usually occur in identical or near-identical form in the the Aṅguttara or the Saṁyutta, and occasionally the Majjhima. Compiling them here enables the reciters of the Dīgha to learn a wide range of doctrine, and provides an essential backup, preserving the texts in case the shorter discourses are lost.

In a few instances, such short passages are not found elsewhere in exactly the same form. Whether that is because they were unique to the Dīgha, or because the parallel passages have become lost, is impossible to say.

How do such parallel passages become formed? Clearly the Buddha taught very often and, like all teachers, repeated his message many times. So in the case of important and generic teachings found throughout the Buddhist literature, like the four noble truths or the four absorptions, the teachings were no doubt simply given at many times and collected in many places.

In some cases, though, this is unlikely or impossible. The same event on the same occasion—with the same teaching, the same location, and the same people—may occur in more than one place. In such instances it is clear that there is, in fact, just one text, and it has been copied into two or more places.

Generally speaking, it is prudent to assume that such passages existed as short discourses before being collected into the larger forms. This is because, as noted above, the short discourse is the dominant form, and rests closest to the oral tradition. It is a principle observed everywhere through early Buddhist texts that the redactors preferred to add rather than subtract. However it is possible that in some cases the passages first appeared in a Dīgha sutta, and were later extracted and made into short discourses.

Examples of compilation are very common, and almost every discourse in the Dīgha does this to some extent. Here are just a few examples.

DN 16 <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> includes a wide range of collected passages. In some cases events pertinent to the narrative may have occurred there originally and been extracted later, while in other cases the included passages seem strangely extraneous to the context and were no doubt added in at some point.

Venerable Sāriputta is said to be the main author of several such long compilations. He is the teacher in DN 33 <cite>Saṅgīti</cite> and DN 34 <cite>Dasuttara</cite>, which consist almost entirely of short passages collected from elsewhere in the suttas and arranged by number. In DN 28 <cite>Sampasādanīya</cite> Sāriputta expresses his great faith in the Buddha, and cites a long series of passages to display the Buddha’s glory.

A more sophisticated form of compilation is found in DN 22 <cite>Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna</cite>, the most important meditation discourse in 20th century Theravada. It gives a detailed account of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. These are taught in brief in many places, but the details are found only here and at the mostly identical MN 10 <cite>Satipaṭṭhāna</cite>. Whereas many compilations simply list a range of different teachings, here the text is very systematic, organizing the compiled passages under the four heads. These meditation passages are mostly not found elsewhere in the Dīgha, and were no doubt added to ensure the Dīgha reciters preserved the full range of meditation teachings. To the already lengthy discourse at MN 10 is added a full exposition on the four noble truths, sourced from MN 141 <cite>Saccavibhaṅga</cite>. In Burmese editions, this extended section later made its way back into the text of MN 10. Since SuttaCentral’s text is a Burmese one, we include this in our Pali, but mark it as an addition.

### Narratives

Unusually for early Buddhist texts, the Dīgha includes several lengthy narratives. Most obviously this includes DN 16 <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>. But it also includes a number of other narratives.

In common with the discourses of other collections, we commonly find a simple narrative background that gives context to the teaching. However, in some cases this is developed in much greater detail. Moreover, the narratives come to play a more sophisticated literary role than mere setting.

DN 2 <cite>Sāmaññaphala</cite> opens with King Ajātasattu of Magadha exclaiming over the beauty of the moonlit night and asking his ministers for advice as to which ascetic teacher  he should visit. From the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> and discourses elsewhere we know that Ajātasattu was a warlike king, so this setting immediately establishes a sense of wonder: what is going on with the king? The narrative unfolds with grace, abjuring the excess of ornament so typical of later Indian narratives, and holding the key to its mystery close to its chest. Only at the end of the text do we learn the dreadful secret that plagues the king’s heart. Thus the narrative portions imbue the teaching sections—on the doctrines of other teachers, and the Buddha’s Gradual Training—with a tragic pathos.

## The Mahāparinibbāna Cycle

In several instances, episodes  mentioned in brief in the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> have been spun off and expanded to become individual discourses in their own right. Thus the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> dominates much of the Dīgha, not just through its own length and thematic weight, but through its influence and connections with other discourses.

In my view, this cycle of suttas was likely composed by Ānanda and his students, beginning this great literary work with the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna Sutta</cite> itself, and gradually branching off into related works. The cycle as a whole shows not only Ānanda’s characteristic personal love and devotion for the Buddha, but also reveals a concern for what is to come, for the fate of the Dhamma in the years after the Buddha’s passing. Ānanda survived the Buddha for several decades, and his legacy was establishing the texts and the memory of the Buddha.

<small>One distinctive unifying detail of these discourses is that they do not end with the standard phrase saying that the listeners rejoiced in the teachings, but instead finish directly with a teaching or a verse on the subject of impermanence or the long-lasting of the dispensation.</small>

- DN 16 <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> (“The Great Discourse on the Buddha’s Extinguishment”): Beginning with King Ajātasattu of Magadha declaring his intent to invade the Vajjis, and ending with the peaceful distribution of the Buddha’s relics to the potentially warring nations and clans, the story of the Buddha’s last journeys is as politically revealing as it is spiritually moving. Throughout, the theme of impermanence unifies the diverse events and teachings. The weight of constructing such an epic shows, however, in the considerable differences between extent versions of the text. Many of the extra repetitious sections—such as the apparently superfluous sets of eight in the early portion of the narrative—are not found in all parallels. It seems that over time, more and more material was added, and at certain points portions of the text were split off to form other discourses in the cycle.
- DN 17 <cite>Mahāsudassana</cite>: In a small scene of the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>, Ānanda encourages the Buddha to pass away in a well-known city, not in the obscure village of Kusinārā. The Buddha rebukes him, saying that in the past it had been a great city. The Sanskrit (Sarvāstivāda) versions of the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> include a shorter account of the story of King Mahāsudassana in their <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> itself, but in the Pali it has become greatly extended and formed into its own long discourse. The discourse itself is fabulous, full of extended passages on the crystal balustrades and other wonders of  Mahāsudassana’s palace. But at its heart is a very human story: the love of the queen for her king, and the pain of letting go. The struggle that the queen undergoes to fully understand that her king must pass mirrors the struggles of Ānanda in the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> as he comes to terms with the passing of his beloved Teacher.
- DN 18 <cite>Janavasabha</cite>: Like DN 17, this begins with a short passage extracted from the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>, to which has been added an extended narrative. During the journey in the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>, Ānanda asks the Buddha to reveal the fate after death of devotees in the town of Nādika. Characteristically, it ends with the Buddha showing how people may know for themselves their own spiritual progress. This short passage is preserved as an independent discourse also in SN 55.10. In DN 18, however, the discourse continues with a long story of the doings of the gods, as told by the spirit Janavasabha. It culminates by saying that this discourses was learned by the Buddha from Janavasabha, and from there was taught to Ānanda, and he informed the assemblies of monks, nuns, laymen, and lay women, resulting in the Buddha’s dispensation being famous and successful among gods and men. This corroborates the idea that these discourses, shaped by Ānanda, were aimed at ensuring the long-lasting of Buddhism.
- DN 28 <cite>Sampasādanīya</cite> (“Inspiring Confidence”): The <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite> records an incident where Sāriputta, the Buddha’s foremost disciple, comes to him and makes a “lion’s roar” of his faith in the Buddha, based on his understanding of Dhamma. This is recorded as an independent discourse at SN 47.12. We also have a short discourse at SN 47.13 that tells of Sāriputta’s death. This echoes the themes of the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>, even including the famous saying that one should be one’s own refuge. Clearly this must have happened during the journey recorded in the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>. Oddly, however, it is not included in DN 16, and in addition, it situates the Buddha in Sāvatthī, far from the track of his journey. Regardless, the passage on the lion’s roar was expanded into its own extensive discourse, with Sāriputta expounding at length on various inspiring qualities of the Buddha. This gives an opportunity to list many standard doctrinal teachings. Like DN 18, the sutta ends with an exhortation to share the teaching.

In addition to texts that have a direct literary and narrative connection with the <cite>Mahāparinibbāna</cite>, there is a further series of discourses that share a more indirect or thematic conection.

- DN 14 <cite>Mahāpadāna</cite> (“The Harvest of Deeds”): The Buddha gives biographical details of six past Buddha, as well as a lengthy account of the life of one of them, Vipassī. This discourse establishes the historical Buddha Siddhattha as one of a series of world teachers that stretch back into the deep past, and whose dispensations all follow similar patterns.
- DN 29 <cite>Pāsādika</cite> (“An Impressive Discourse”): This begins with the story of the passing away of the Jain leader Mahāvīra (Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta). In the Buddhist texts, this is depicted as a disaster for the Jains, as they fell apart in conflict right away. Whether this is historically accurate or not, the Buddha took it as an opportunity to teach the qualities that make a religious movement last long after the passing of the founder. Discourses in response to this are found at DN 29, MN 104, and DN 33. In the current sutta, contrasting his own dispensation with what he claims was the inadequacy of Jain techings, the Buddha declares that the faith and practice of his followers is well-grounded, since it is based on genuine Awakening.
- DN 30 <cite>Lakkhaṇa</cite> (“The Marks of a Great Man”): The early texts refer several times to a mysterious set of bodily characteristics known as the “marks of a great man”. These are said to fulfill a brahmanical prophecy that one who possesses such marks will either become a universal emperor or a fully awakened Buddha. Normally when the suttas present something as a brahmanical teaching, it is in fact found in brahmanical texts. But in this case no trace of such a doctrine has been found. The origins of this mythological idea are obscure. The story of the two paths is a classic mythological theme, found in the oldest known myth, the story of Gilgamesh. The marks of a great man exist as a curious counterpoint to the rational teachings found in most of the suttas. In this particular sutta, the Buddha is said to have explained each mark as a consequence of a specific kind of kammic deed. The literary and verse styles betray this as a late composition, and it has no real parallel in other collections. Nevertheless, it remains as a testament to the evolution of the idea of the Buddha, relating his spiritual qualities to his physical presence.
- DN 33 <cite>Saṅgīti</cite> (“Reciting in Concert”): Like DN 29, this discourse is set after the death of Mahāvīra. Speaking to the Mallians of Pāvā—who appear also in the <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> the Buddha asks Sāriputta to speak on his behalf. This echoes the theme of DN 27 and DN 28, that it is the disciples who will be responsible for the continuation of the teachings. Sāriputta gives an extensive systematic presentation of doctrines, using the Aṅguttara principle of organizing teachings by number. The monastics are encouraged to recite these teachings in concert, so that they may be preserved and the dispensation continued for a long time. This discourse anticipates the systematic tendencies of the Abhidhamma, and indeed one of the Sarvāstivādin Abhidhamma texts (<cite>Saṅgītiparyāya</cite>) consists of an expansion and commentary on this discourse.
- DN 34 <cite>Dasuttara</cite> (“Up to Ten”): This is similar to the <cite>Saṅgīti</cite>, but with a briefer narrative context and even more systematic style. Here the Buddha no longer appears, and the discourse is simply spoken by Sāriputta.

But even this does not exhaust the scope of the <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> cycle, for it is not confined to the Dīgha. We have already mentioned that several shorter suttas contain episodes either found in the <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> or related to it. But the story does not end with the Buddha's death. The <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> tells of the funeral arrangements and events following the Buddha's passing. In several versions apart from the Pali, this story continues directly into the account of the First Council. This narrative is the 21st chapter of the Vinaya Khandhakas, and indeed the <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> is found in the Vinaya of several schools. It is, in fact, one continuous narrative, and one of the many purposes of the <cite>Mahāparibbāna</cite> is to authorize the actions of the Saṅgha at the First Council, establishing the fundamental Buddhist scriptures in an organized and definitive manner. The First Council narrative was then extended to the Second Council, which echoes many of the same themes and ideas.

But these stories of the end of the Buddha's life and teaching are also echoed in the first chapter of the Vinaya Khandhakas, which tells the story of the Buddha's awakening, first teaching, and establishing of his community of followers. These are not just separate episodes in the Buddha's life. The texts as we have them frequently echo ideas, turns of phrase, events, and people, all of which show that they were edited and composed as a coherent whole. Taken together, they make up a framework of a magnificent mythology: the life and death of the greatest spiritual teacher that the world has ever known.
