I have long admired the careful and detailed introductions crafted by Bhikkhu Bodhi for his _nikāya_ translations. I wanted to offer something of a similar scope for readers of SuttaCentral. Since Bhikkhu Bodhi’s introductions have been released under a Creative Common license, I contemplated simply hosting them here. However there were a number of problems with this idea.

Most obviously, he has not translated the Dīgha Nikāya, so there is no introduction. And, while both T.W. Rhys Davids and Maurice Walshe provided long introductions to their translations of the Dīgha, they dealt with issues of a more general nature and do not really introduce the Dīgha as a collection.

A second problem was that Bhikkhu Bodhi’s introductions deal extensively with matters that pertain specifically to his translations, such as renderings for technical terms, which are not always relevant for my translations. Moreover, his introductions were written nearly a decade apart, so they are quite independent, while I wanted something to reflect the integrated nature of my translations.

Finally, in some matters he approached problems in a different way than I, especially in the use of the commentaries. While we both want to focus on the meaning of the Pali suttas as they are, he tends to bring in commentarial explanations, sometimes even when the suttas are clear and he admits the commentaries complicate things. I prefer to leave the commentaries aside unless really necessary. If context is needed, I will look first of all to the traditions that precede the Buddha, rather than those that came after. I am more interested in how the Buddha responded to his situation than in how the later generations of Buddhists responded to theirs.
