# Introducing the Middle Discourses

In the classic introduction to his translation of the Majjhima Nikāya—an introduction that inspired the current essay—Bhikkhu Bodhi described the Majjhima as “the collection that combines the richest variety of contextual settings with the deepest and most comprehensive assortment of teachings”. He went on to situate it among the other nikāyas:

>Like the Dīgha Nikāya, the Majjhima is replete with drama and narrative, while lacking much of its predecessor’s tendency towards imaginative embellishment and profusion of legend. Like the Saṁyutta, it contains some of the profoundest discourses in the Canon, disclosing the Buddha’s radical insights into the nature of existence; and like the Aṅguttara, it covers a wide range of topics of practical applicability. In contrast to those two Nikāyas, however, the Majjhima sets forth this material not in the form of short, self-contained utterances, but in the context of a fascinating procession of scenarios that exhibit the Buddha’s resplendence of wisdom, his skill in adapting his teachings to the needs and proclivities of his interlocutors, his wit and gentle humour, his majestic sublimity, and his compassionate humanity.

In this short introductory essay, I describe some of the special features of the Majjhima, but avoid going into the doctrines. This is partly because, in general, the teachings of the four *nikāyas* are highly consistent and interrelated and are best regarded as collections to be “seen together” (synoptic).

But it’s also because I have reservations about the usefulness of summaries. There have been plenty of attempts at summarizing the doctrines of the early texts that are quite fine as far as summaries go. But the true joy of the suttas is to see the undigested teachings, the raw moment when the Buddha encounters a person in suffering and helps them, not by giving them a digested abstract, but by reaching out to them as people. I feel that it’s better to let a general understanding of the teachings emerge from such moments, rather than setting it as a precondition. Thus the purpose of this introduction is not to condition your expectations of what the Buddha taught, but to give some background information and orientation.

## The Structure of the Majjhima

### Finding Your Way

The Buddha’s teaching is a graduated one, leading from simple principles to profound realizations. This pattern is observed in almost all of the discourses in one way or another. However it does _not_ apply to the collections of discourses. From discourse to discourse there is no graduation in difficulty, no build up of assumed knowledge in the student.  

On the contrary, the Majjhima Nikāya begins with the Mūlapariyāya Sutta, one of the most profound and difficult discourses in the whole canon. A student who dives in unwarily will suddenly find themselves in very deep waters.

So if a beginning student wishes to build up their foundations of knowledge step by step, they can’t rely on simply reading the suttas in order. It’s best to start with a structured reading guide, hopefully with an experienced teacher. As a small help, we provide “difficulty” icons for the discourses of the Majjhima and the Dīgha: a new sprout for beginners, a sapling for intermediate students, and a flourishing tree for advanced students.

Having said which, there’s nothing wrong with simply plunging in at random, so long as you don’t expect everything to make sense at first. Usually you’ll find that obscure or difficult ideas are explained somewhere else in the suttas. Discovering those unexpected connections is one of the joys of reading the suttas.

As students of Buddhist texts we are primarily interested in the content, in learning what the Buddha and his disciples had to say. However, due to the manner in which the texts are arranged, we quickly discover that it’s not easy to find what we want, or to know how different texts relate to each other. So while it may seem dry, it is worth spending a little time to consider the _structure_ of the texts.

Early Buddhist texts were organized, not for reading, but for oral recitation and memorization. The overriding concern was to divide the texts into chunks that could be memorized and recited together. Since the texts were preserved in memory, they were largely “random access”: a skilled student could instantly recall a passage from anywhere in the texts, without having to flip through the pages or look up an index. In this way, the earliest system of organization is a little similar to how we find information today through a search engine.

It follows from this that we cannot expect early Buddhist texts to be structured sequentially like a modern book. But the collections are not random or chaotic: they follow their own logic and principles, which we can readily understand.

### How the Majjhima is Organized

The Majjhima Nikāya is the second of the four main collections in the Sutta Piṭaka of the Pali Canon (*tipiṭaka*). It is translated here as <cite>Middle Discourses</cite>, and is sometimes known as the <cite>Middle-Length Discourses</cite>. As the title suggests, its discourses are somewhat shorter than those of the Dīgha Nikāya (<cite>Long Discourses</cite>), but longer than the many short discourses collected in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (<cite>Linked Discourses</cite>) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (<cite>Numbered Discourses</cite>).

Among students of the suttas, the names of these collections are often abbreviated to “Dīgha”, “Majjhima”, and so on, just as the word “Sutta” is often omitted from sutta titles. Strictly speaking, it’d be best to use the Pali title when referring to the original text, and the translated title when referring to the translation, but this distinction is often overlooked.

There are 152 discourses collected in the  Majjhima. These are collected into groups of 50 discourses (*paṇṇāsa*), although the final *paṇṇāsa* contains 52. The *paṇṇāsas* are purely for convenience, and do not correspond to any meaningful divisions of the text.

Within each *paṇṇāsa* is a set of five *vaggas*. The *vagga* is the most widespread and distinctive structural unit in early Buddhist texts. It usually consists of ten textual units, which may be ten discourses, ten verses, ten rules, and so on. The number ten is adhered to fairly consistently, although on occasion a *vagga* may contain more or less than ten. This happens in the second-last *vagga* of the Majjhima, which contains twelve discourses.

Like the *paṇṇāsa*, the *vagga* is often no more than a division to help organize the discourses neatly. In such cases, a *vagga* is usually simply named after its first discourse. However, it is also common to find that a *vagga* collects discourses with a loose thematic unity. Examples of this in the Majjhima include:

- **Opamma Vagga (Chapter With Similes):** All these discourses prominently feature similes.
- **Mahāyamaka Vagga (Large Chapter With Pairs):** Paired “long” and “short” discourses.
- **Vaggas 6–10:** These collect discourses featuring certain kinds of people: householders, mendicants, wanderers, kings, and brahmins.
- **Vibhaṅga Vagga (Chapter on Analysis):** These discourses consist of a lengthy “analysis” of a short saying.
- **Saḷāyatana Vagga (Chapter on the Six Senses):** These focus on the six senses.

In some cases it seems that such thematic vaggas may have pre-existed the collections in which they are found today, and thus may be found in similar form in different collections.

## The Audience

In the Majjhima Nikāya, as elsewhere in the suttas, we commonly see the Buddha teaching his monastic disciples. This itself can be quite diverse, as the community was comprised of men and women from all walks of life, and at varying levels of spiritual achievement.

However the monastics are far from the only people we meet. In his wide wanderings across the Ganges plain, the Buddha interacted with a wide cross-section of the local peoples: learned brahmins and simple villagers; kings and slaves; priests and prostitutes; women and men; children and the elderly; the devout and the skeptical; the sick and the disabled; those seeking to disparage and those sincerely seeking the truth.

## Imagery and Narrative

The suttas of the Majjhima are typically structured in an ABA pattern. A statement is made; a simile is given; and the statement is repeated. This formal pattern is highly effective in reinforcing learning. First we get the basic idea. But abstract philosophical or psychological statements are hard to understand and remember without any context. So the Buddha illuminates his teaching with a simile. The range of similes in the suttas is truly astounding. The Buddha was able to effortlessly summon an apt comparison from anything that he saw around him. The similes also convey a great deal of incidental detail regarding life and culture in the Buddha’s day, and, more importantly, they show how the Dhamma teaching makes sense in its context.

Sometimes the similes are extended to a brief parable or fable. MN 21 <cite>The Simile of the Saw
</cite> tells the memorable story of the bold maid Kāḷī who tested her mistress. In MN 56.27 <cite>With Upāli</cite> we meet the brahmin lady who wanted to not only dye her pet monkey, but press and wring him out.

Curiously enough, however, we rarely see the Buddha engage in story-telling of any length. Where narratives are developed in some detail, they are typically as part of the background material (<i>nidāna</i>) rather than in the Buddha’s teaching as such. Here we find such famous stories as the taming of the vicious serial-killer Aṅgulimāla (MN 86) or the uncompromising commitment of the wealthy youth Raṭṭhapāla (MN 82), who defied his parents will to take ordination, and whose discourse finishes with an extraordinary set of teachings for his king.

Some stories are less earth-bound. MN 37 <cite>The Shorter Discourse on the Ending of Craving
</cite> depicts Moggallāna ascending to the heaven of Sakka the lord of gods to check his indulgence. MN 50 <cite>The Rebuke of Māra</cite> also features Moggallāna, ths time in a dialogue with Māra, the lord of deceit and death; and it contains the startling revelation that Moggallāna himself was Māra in a past life. Such cosmic drama reaches its apex in MN 49 <cite>On the Invitation of Brahmā</cite>, where the Buddha takes on no less that Brahmā himself in a high-level philosophical debate, forcing Māra to reveal himself on the side of Brahmā. From the perspective of early Buddhism, God and the Devil are not so very different.

## The Buddha in the Majjhima

The story of the Buddha’s life has become a primary vehicle for sharing and passing down Buddhist teachings and values in the Buddhist traditions, especially the Theravāda. Yet there is no coherent life of the Buddha in the early texts. Such information as we do have is scattered and piecemeal, found in the occasional details shared by the Buddha himself or inferred from the various situations in which we find him. But perhaps this shouldn’t come as such a surprise. There’s no particular reason for the Buddha to be interested in telling his life story—he had lived it. And his disciples knew him personally. Only after he had passed away did the community feel the need to keep their teacher’s memory alive through vivid and detailed stories, growing more elaborate with every telling.

The broad outlines of the later Buddha legends, however, grew out of the kernels found in the early texts, many of which are found in the Majjhima. Here we find the Buddha’s birth, his early upbringing, renunciation, practice and awakening, challenges involved in setting up a community, and various encounters while teaching. In one sense, most of the discourses can be considered as episodes of the Buddha’s life, vignettes in a magnificent myth, each one contributing a little to understanding the man and his message.

In MN 123 <cite>Incredible and Amazing</cite> we find Ānanda, the founder of Buddhist biography, recounting an extended series of apparently miraculous events that accompanied the birth of the Buddha-to-be. Whether regarded as history or legend, this text, with its devotional tone and emphasis on the extraordinary, shows a shift in emphasis towards honoring the person of the Buddha; a shift that the Buddha resists by pointing out that the truly extraordinary thing is to be aware of one’s own mind.

It is in the Majjhima (MN 36, MN 85, MN 100) that the Buddha speaks of that crucial moment in his childhood where he spontaneously entered the first absorption, a state of profound peace and stillness in meditation. Much later, when he arrived at a crisis in his spiritual progress, he was to recall this event and realize that such peace was the only true path to awakening (*eso’va maggo bodhāya*).

In MN 75.10 <cite>With Māgaṇḍiya</cite> the Buddha recounts the luxuries he enjoyed as a young man, and in MN 26.13 tells of how he left home though his parents wept. There follows the story of the six years of striving, divided into three periods. It seems that first he practiced under a yogic tradition, probably following the Upanishadic philosophy. MN 26 tells of his experience under the famed spiritual guides Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta. Despite the elevated meditative attainments he reached under their tutelage, he was still unsatisfied, so he left to embark on a more severe ascetic path.

According to the traditions, the bulk of the six years was spent enduring harsh austerities, practices that are similar or identical to those observed by the Jains. These are described in detail in MN 12 <cite>The Longer Discourse on the Lion’s Roar</cite> and MN 36 <cite>The Longer Discourse With Saccaka</cite>. But after many years of such self-mortification he was getting nowhere. So he took some solid food and, recalling his childhood experience of absorption, began the third and final phase of his practice, which lead directly to his awakening.

While it might seem as if the night of awakening followed directly from his rejection of austerities, several discourses in the Majjhima indicate that this period involved a rather extensive development of meditation. MN 19 <cite>Two Kinds of Thought</cite>, for example, tells of his analysis and training in wholesome thought; MN 4 <cite>Fear and Terror</cite> depicts his struggles to overcome fear; and MN 128 <cite>Corruptions</cite> speaks of a series of specific meditative hindrances he encountered.

The Majjhima makes no mention of the Buddha’s wife, although his son Rāhula is prominently featured in several discourses (MN 61, MN 62, MN 147), showing the Buddha’s patient teaching and Rāhula’s eventual awakening. The Buddha’s father is briefly mentioned in the above passage on meditation as a child, but his birth mother, Māyā, is not mentioned in the Majjhima at all. His stepmother Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, however, appears in MN 142 <cite>The Analysis of Offerings to the Teacher</cite>, where she offers robes to her son; but he encourages her to offer them rather to the whole community.

The Buddha followed the same simple lifestyle as his monastic disciples. His possessions consisted of a single set of three robes, a bowl, and few other sundry items. He stayed for the most part in Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery in Sāvatthi, although he spent time also in other monasteries. While in a monastery he lived in a simple hut. The year was divided into three seasons—hot, rainy, and cold. During the rainy season he always stayed in a monastery, while for the other seasons he might also wander the countryside.

A typical day would begin with early rising for meditation. The approaching dawn signaled the start of the day’s activities, particularly the daily alms round. Now, while in the monastery, monastics would typically wear only a lower sarong-like robe (and an upper cloth for the nuns). So, some time after dawn, they would dress in the full set of three robes before proceeding to a nearby village or town for alms round. During the alms round, as may be seen in Buddhist lands today, lay folk would put some food in the bowl to be eaten that day. Buddhist monastics are not allowed to receive money. The monastics would eat once or twice a day, but always between dawn and noon; or at least, that was the situation following the laying down of the relevant rules, the story of which is told in MN 65, MN 66, and MN 70.

Normally the mendicants would retire after the morning meal to solitude for the day’s meditation, either in their huts, or perhaps in a nearby forest or some other quiet spot. In the hot season the Buddha would sometimes have a short siesta in the afternoon (MN 36.46). Towards evening the Buddha would emerge and would often give teachings or answer questions. But this was spontaneous, and not a fixed routine. Then he would meditate until late at night, needing only a few hours sleep in the middle of the night.

This brief description does not do justice to the impact that the Buddha had on those who encountered him. MN 91 <cite>With Brahmāyu</cite> describes his behavior in minute detail, recording the tiny nuances of mindfulness and care that he brought to every activity. His followers saw him as the embodiment of the highest truth. Discerning his realization in every detail of his words and acts, they could be moved to exalted praise (MN 92 <cite>With Sela</cite>). However, far from encouraging mindless devotion, the Buddha encouraged his students to investigate him, describing a rigorous and detailed set of tests that a good spiritual teacher should pass (MN 47 <cite>The Inquirer</cite>).

As the “Realized One” (<i>tathāgatha</i>) the Buddha was one of a series of awakened masters of truly cosmic significance. His understanding did not just pertain to the narrow locale of his own time and place, but was equally relevant to all sentient beings in all realms at all times. While as a person he was unique, and unequaled in his time, the Buddhist traditions assert that other Buddhas have arisen in the past and will arise again in the future, with the same realization and teachings. The Majjhima doesn’t include a detailed list of past Buddhas, but the mentions of the Buddhas Kakusandha in MN 50 and Kassapa in MN 81 show that the underlying idea was current. MN 116 <cite>Isigili</cite> also refers to the so-called "Buddhas awakened for themselves” (*paccekabuddha*), a mysterious kind of sage who has realized the same truths as the “fully awakened Buddha” (*sammāsambuddha*) but does not establish a religion.

Nevertheless, despite his exalted and revered status, the Buddha in the Majjhima had not yet been elevated to the cosmic divinity who appears in later Buddhism. He is a very human figure. Nowhere does he say that his practice in past lives led to his awakening in this life; there is no mention of the *pāramīs*. Indeed, in one of the rare occasions when he refers to a past life (MN 81 <cite>Ghaṭikāra</cite>) he appears decidedly un-enlightened. In the Majjhima, the term *bodhisatta* means “one intent on awakening”, and it is clear that from the time he left home he was not following a path that he had started long ago, but was exploring the different options available to him, uncertain as to how awakening may be gained. His crucial insight came, not by recollecting vows made in past lives, but when he remembered the time he fell into absorption as a child.

In the Majjhima, the Buddha goes to great lengths to detail the many trials and experiments he undertook before his path was mature. His truly special quality was that he discovered the path through his own efforts, and later taught that same path to his disciples. Even disciples who had realized the same liberation and understanding revered the Buddha as the one of unsurpassed wisdom and compassion who had illuminated the path for others.

## The Disciples

Although we think of the suttas as “teachings of the Buddha”, in fact only about a quarter of the discourses in the Majjhima feature the Buddha simply delivering a discourse to the assembly. Over half the discourses consist of dialogues (*vyākaraṇa*). Sometimes the Buddha asks a question and leads the assembly through a process of Socratic inquiry. Sometimes a seeker asks a question or a series of questions. The Buddha may answer in various ways—sometimes directly, sometimes with a counter-question, sometimes with a lengthy analysis—depending on the nature of the question and the questioner. And intriguingly, he sometimes doesn’t answer at all.

And as well as featuring in one way or another in most of the discourses, various disciples serve as primary teachers in about a fifth of the discourses of the Majjhima, continuing the Buddha’s work of exploring and explaining the teachings. In the Majjhima Nikāya we meet a range of skilled and accomplished teachers, many of whom became widely-famed in the Buddhist traditions. From the beginning of his dispensation, the Buddha was eager to empower his followers, encouraging them to share the teaching to the best of their ability.

Nine discourses are spoken by the Buddha’s chief disciple and renowned General of the Dhamma, Sāriputta. These include MN 9, a wide-ranging exploration of the many facets of right view; MN 28, which shows how all the teachings can be included in the four noble truths; and MN 141, giving a fully detailed explanation of the four noble truths based on the Buddha’s first sermon. In these discourses Sāriputta shows his interest in developing a systematic overview of the Dhamma. Such analyses are one of the primary inspirations behind the later development of the Abhidhamma texts, and Sāriputta is rightly regarded as one of the fathers of the Abhidhamma.

Mahākaccāna is another monk of renowned wisdom, whose incisive analytic style, with especial focus on the process of sense experience, influenced the Abhidhamma. He spoke four discourses in the Majjhima. MN 28, the “Honey Cake” demonstrates his unmatched skill in drawing out subtle implications of brief teachings by the Buddha. This discourse received a detailed treatment in Katukurunde Nyanananda’s <cite>Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought</cite>, one of the most influential monographs in modern Buddhist studies.

MN 24, a dialogue between Sāriputta and Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, speaks of a relay of chariots, introducing the idea of the seven stages of purification that was to greatly influence the concept of stages of insight in Buddhaghosa’s <cite>Visuddhimagga</cite> and contemporary Theravada meditation.

The nun Dhammadinnā presents the only discourse by a *bhikkhunī* in the Majjhima. It seems that the teachings by women in the suttas, while rare, were included because of their unique and striking wisdom. In MN 44 she responds to a series of questions by her former husband, revealing her depth of meditative accomplishment and wisdom.

Further discourses by disciples include several by Moggallāna, Anuruddha, and others. And we cannot pass a discussion on disciples without mentioning Ānanda, who lived closest to the Buddha, and through whom, according to tradition, all the texts passed. Ānanda is the main teacher in seven discourses, and features in many more. Ānanda has a specially close interest in the personal life of the Buddha, and it is with him that the Buddha’s life story began to take on its familiar form.

## A Brief and Incomplete Translation History

The significance of the Majjhima was recognized by European scholars early on. The text was edited by V. Trenckner (vol. 1) and Robert Chalmers (vols. 2 and 3) on the basis of manuscripts in Sinhalese, Burmese, and Thai scripts, and published in Latin script by the Pali Text Society from 1888 to 1899. The first translation followed in 1926–7 by Robert Chalmers under the title <cite>Further Dialogues of the Buddha</cite>.

Rapid improvements in understanding of Pali and Buddhism during the early 20th century soon made it clear that an improved translation was needed. This was undertaken in the 1950s by I.B. Horner, and was published by the PTS as <cite>The Book of Middle Length Sayings</cite> in 1954–9.

Her translation, while a significant improvement on Trenckner’s, was soon eclipsed by that of Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi. Ñāṇamoḷi’s extraordinary career as a Pali scholar and translator was tragically cut short by his early death, and his Majjhima Nikāya translation remained as an unfinished hand-written manuscript. Nevertheless, its value was so clear that it was published, first as a selection of 90 discourses edited by Bhikkhu Khantipalo and published in Bangkoko in 1976 as <cite>A Treasury of the Buddha's Word</cite>, then as a fully edited and updated version by Bhikkhu Bodhi in 1995 under the title <cite>The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima Nikaya</cite>. The latter version reached a peak of accuracy, consistency, and readability that has become the standard to which all later translations of the *nikāyas* have aspired.

Unlike previous translations based on the PTS edition, my translation was based on the Mahāsaṅgīti edition, which is essentially a digital representation of the Burmese textual tradition of the 5th and 6th Councils. However, like most translators, when editions vary I did not adhere to one edition, but simply selected what seems to be the best reading in each case. When the Pali was unclear I frequently referred to the earlier work of Ñāṇamoḷi & Bodhi, and less often to Horner and various translations of specific texts. I also had access to notes by Bhikkhus Ñāṇadīpa and Ñāṇatusita on Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation. In addition, I consulted the Chinese and other parallel texts, and the detailed studies on these by Bhikkhu Anālayo. However, I found these to be useful for translation in only a few cases, as I believe it is important to preserve the integrity of the different textual lineages. Comparative studies lose value when the underlying texts have already been reconciled.

Translations of the Majjhima are equally popular in languages apart from English. SuttaCentral currently hosts translations of all or part of the Majjhima in about thirty languages. We aim to expand and improve coverage so that people of the world can enjoy these teachings in their own language.
