
### The Many Spiritual Paths of Ancient India

An outstanding feature of early Buddhist texts is interreligious dialogue. The Buddha did not live in a Buddhist culture. We frequently encounter the Buddha and his disciples discussing various aspects of spiritual philosophy and practice with followers of other spiritual paths, or with people of no particular path. Sometimes they would come to the Buddha seeking to learn or even to attack. And it is not uncommon to find the Buddha and his disciples actively seeking out followers of other spiritual paths simply to engage in conversation. In this, the early texts are quite different from later Buddhist literature, which almost always consists of Buddhists speaking with other Buddhists. While many of these people ended up declaring themselves followers of the Buddha, this was not the purpose of the dialogue. The Buddha did not debate simply to win an argument, but out of compassion, to help alleviate suffering.

The religious situation in the Buddha’s time was no less complex than it is in contemporary India. However it would be a mistake to read modern conditions back into the ancient texts. Many of the elements that make up modern Hinduism may be discerned, but Indian religion, like spiritual and religious practice everywhere, has always been in a state of flux and evolution. Many of the old gods featured in the Ṛg Veda had vanished by the time of the Buddha, and many of the famed deities of later Hinduism had not yet appeared. Those who do appear take on a markedly different aspect; prominent gods may appear in minor roles, or a warrior like Sakka (AKA Indra) appears as an apostle of peace.

Amid the complex sets of religious practices, we may discern three major domains.

1. **Animism:** In the villages and towns of ancient India, the most widespread folk religion was a belief in the omnipresent reality of spirits in nature. Such deities might embody aspects of the weather, or live in plants or rivers or caves; they might promote abundance, or take ferocious and threatening forms. They were unreliable, but could be wooed through simple offerings of rice, flowers, or ghee. Animist beliefs were derived from local legends and rituals, not from religious philosophy. However, the higher religious paths such as Buddhism or Jainism, rather than repressing such beliefs, were happy to assign them a minor role in the scheme of things, so long as they eliminated harmful practices like human or animal sacrifice.
1. **Brahmanism:** The caste who called themselves “brahmins” inherited an ancient body of sacred lore known as the Vedas. This consisted of three sets of oral scriptures (in the early Buddhist texts; later the Arthavaveda was added as the fourth), among which the Ṛg Veda was primary. The Ṛg Veda was ultimately derived from the cultural and religious milieu of the ancient Indo-European peoples, and shares much in common with the Persian Zend Avesta, and more distantly, the mythologies of Europe. It seems that the Indo-European people moved into India around a millennium before the Buddha, with distinct clans maintaining sets of sacred lore. Around 800 BCE in the area know as the Kuru country (modern Delhi) the clans were unified into the classical brahmanical kingdom whose story is echoed in the Mahābharata. The Ṛg Veda was forged from the books of the clans, wrapped in opening and closing chapters emphasizing unity. By the time of the Buddha, the brahmanical culture and language had already become strongly established in the regions further south and east where the Buddha lived. The brahmins insisted on the holiness of their caste, the efficacy of their rituals, the truth of their scriptures, and the omnipotence of their deities. The Buddha rejected all these claims out of hand. However, Brahmanical traditions were far from a unified monolith. We see a strong strand of questioning of tradition, of seeking out new ways, of earnest seeking of the truth; and such attitudes are just as strong in the Brahmanical texts as the Buddhist. Brahmins were typically family men, living a settled life, and expecting a degree of social respect and standing due to their learning and caste—a respect that they did not always deserve. Some brahmins had adopted an ascetic lifestyle, apparently influenced by the *samaṇas*.
1. **The Samaṇas:** Quite distinct from the brahmins, and often in opposition to them, was a complex religious movement known as the <i>samaṇas</i> or “ascetics”. Six prominent ascetic schools were acknowledged in the time of the Buddha, and the Buddha counted himself among them. Like the Buddhists, the other *samaṇas* were typically celibate renunciates, living either in solitude or in monastic communities, and relying on alms for food.  The most famous—and the only one to survive until today—was the Jains, who flourished under their leader Mahāvīra, known as Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta in the Buddhist texts. The ascetics shared an iconoclastic attitude, and all rejected the brahmanical system *in toto*. However they varied amongst each other, as shown in their teachings attested at MN 60 and MN 76. Some emphasized austerities and self-mortification, others rationality and debate. Some advocated ardent effort, others a resigned fatalism. Some taught rebirth, while others asserted that this material world was the only reality. But regardless of what we might think of their sometimes florid and obscure doctrines, they are a lasting testament to the diversity and vigor of religious life in ancient India.
