# The Linked Discourses: the blueprint for Buddhist philosophy

The Saṁyutta Nikāya is the third of the four main divisions in the Sutta Piṭaka of the Pali Canon (*tipiṭaka*). It is translated here as <cite>Linked Discourses</cite>, and is sometimes known as the <cite>Connected Discourses</cite>. As the title suggests, its discourses are grouped thematically. These thematic groups of texts are called *saṁyuttas*, and the Saṁyutta Nikāya is the collection of such *saṁyuttas*.

The Saṁyutta Nikāya consists of 56 *saṁyuttas* collected in five large “books” (*vagga*), containing over a thousand discourses. The Mahāsaṅgīti text as used on SuttaCentral contains 2837 discourses; but the total number is somewhat arbitrary, as it depends on how the abbreviated texts are expanded, which differs in different editions. This variation, however, applies only to the way the texts are counted, and does not affect the content, which is almost identical in every edition.

It is in the Saṁyutta Nikāya that we find the core doctrines that have formed the basis for all subsequent Buddhist philosophy. While the text itself does not spell out its organizational principles, the major doctrinal sections correspond with the template of the four noble truths.

1. Suffering
  - Aggregates (SN 22)
  - Six sense media (SN 35)
2. The origin of suffering
  - Dependent origination (SN 12)
3. The cessation of suffering
  - The unconditioned (SN 43)
4. The practice that leads to the end of suffering
  - The chapters of the final book, the Mahāvagga (SN 45–54)

The four noble truths themselves are treated in the final chapter, the Saccasaṁyutta (SN 56).

Not all the *saṁyuttas* fit so easily into this scheme. There are many minor *saṁyuttas*, which are sometimes connected with a major *saṁyutta*, and sometimes not. In addition, the first book, the Sagāthāvagga, is not organized by subject. Rather, the thematic linking here is the type of person involved in the discourse. These texts are also unified in literary form; they are in mixed prose and verse.

This collection has a full parallel in the Saṁyuktāgama (SA) of the Sarvāstivāda school in Chinese translation. In addition, there are two partial collections in Chinese (SA-2 and SA-3) as well as a number of miscellaneous or fragmentary texts in Chinese, Sanskrit, and Tibetan. Much of the organizational structure of SN is shared with SA, suggesting that this structure preceded the split between these two collections.

## How the Saṁyutta is Organized

The Saṁyutta Nikāya is conveniently divided into five large *vaggas* or “books”. As noted in the General Introduction, the Saṁyutta is an example of the “nested *vagga*” structure, where the (unusual) *vagga* as “book” includes many of the normal kind of “small” *vagga*, i.e. groups of about ten suttas.

Within each of the five “big” *vaggas* there are several *saṁyuttas*, each containing a set of discourses that are linked by theme or person (sometimes both). For example, each of the discourses in SN 5 features a nun (*bhikkhunī*), while each discourse in SN 24 deals with the subject of “views” (*diṭṭhi*).

In SuttaCentral, the discourses of the Saṁyutta are referenced by *saṁyutta* and *sutta*. Thus SN 1.1 is the first discourse of the first *saṁyutta*, while SN 56.11 is the eleventh discourse of the fifty-sixth *saṁyutta*. The SC system is the same as that used by Bhikkhu Bodhi and on Access to Insight.

The five books are named according to various principles:

- Vol. 1 Sagāthāvagga contains sets of discourses that contain verses, as indicated by the title.
- Vols. 2–4 are each named after the first and largest *saṁyutta* of the book.
- Vol. 5 is called the “Great Book” due to its size.

In this Introduction I will give an overview of each of the five books. However, I will not summarize each of the 56 *saṁyuttas*, for that would make the introduction far too long. For such summaries, see the lists of suttas on SuttaCentral, which include explanations of the various structural levels of the *saṁyutta*, as well as each individual discourse.

## The Book With Verses

The “Book With Verses” (Sagāthāvagga) is divided into eleven <i>saṁyuttas</i>, with a total of 271 suttas.

While most of the Saṁyutta is organized around subject matter, here the organizational principle is people. Each <i>saṁyutta</i> depicts a conversation involving the Buddha or his disciples with a different person or kind of person, such as gods, kings, nuns, or brahmins.

A typical sutta has a bare narrative framework, where someone comes to the Buddha and utters a verse, and the Buddha replies with a better one. In some cases, notably the Sakkasaṁyutta, the narrative element is developed into a lively exchange.

Each of the suttas in this collection contains verse with a prose narrative background, although in many cases the prose has been omitted through abbreviation. This kind of literary form is extremely common in Indic literature, so it is worth spending a little time to understand how it works.

The oldest Indic literature is the Ṛg Veda, a collection of about 10,600 verses. These were passed down in the oral tradition of the brahmins for thousands of years. One of the keys to accurate transmission of this sacred lore was the use of metre. Indian verse is always structured according to a certain rhythmic pattern, based on set patterns of long and short syllables. Such metres provide a scaffolding that organize words, and hence knowledge, in a form that is as memorable as a song; and indeed, they would have been sung to a simple melody. In this way, the verses become set in a precise and defined form, one that may be preserved and passed down unaltered through the generations.

But poetry is not just technically complex; it is ecstatic, inspired, divine. The brahmins did not see the Vedas as being authored in the normal sense, but channeled as the divine word of god (Brahmā) through human sages (Pali: *isi*; Sanskrit: *ṛṣi*). The Vedic verses constantly allude to stories, myths, and events—for example, the slaying of the dragon Vṛtra by the god-hero Indra—that were well known to their audience, and thus did not require spelling out in the text itself. The verses are in fact hymns, invoked in ritual to heighten the emotional response, to inspire awe, fear, or devotion. They are given meaning and context by the background understanding of the mythology. Thus the verses imply a story, of which they are the emotional and narrative climax.

So we can think of a verse as the seed crystal around which a more flexible prose narrative grows and evolves. The prose may be adjusted to time and place, presented in greater or lesser detail, or adapted for the audience, commenting on contemporary events or expressing a personal perspective; but the song remains (relatively) the same.

In the Book With Verses we see this ancient Vedic pattern adopted to serve a Buddhist purpose. It is no coincidence that here we meet various deities, many of whom derive directly from Vedic mythology, in contexts that sometimes directly respond to specific Vedic or brahmanical passages.

The casual appearance of deities throughout these texts is, of course, problematic. These days, we don’t normally see gods manifesting with glorious light at spiritual gatherings. So how are we to understand this?

One obvious answer is that such texts are literally true: gods of these names did appear in exactly the way depicted and have these exact conversations. Okay, but if so, why are such things are not seen in our day? One might be tempted to point regretfully to the decline of religious and ethical life in modern times. But this creates an even bigger problem. For when we see the past as a uniquely privileged era, one blessed with a degree of purity and wholesomeness that is lost to us, then what is the point of practice? Are we not better off pining for the glories of old, and wishing for the renewal of the Dhamma under the future Buddha Metteyya? Such views, which are popular in traditional Buddhist cultures, forget a basic principle of the teaching: it is *akāliko*—we can realize it here & now, no matter when we live.

So perhaps we are better off adopting a skeptical view: such deities do not exist, and such events did not happen. They are simply religious propaganda, fictions whose purpose is to convert simple people by importing a familiar Indic cosmology. If there is any reality at all to them, it is purely psychological. Such beings represent different aspects of the mind. Despite its scientific pretensions, this reductive view, too, is unsustainable. The ideas of rebirth and the existence of multiple dimensions of existence are not found just in popular narratives, but are central to core teachings such as the four noble truths (*yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobbhavikā*) and dependent origination. They can’t be simply written off as an uncritical inheritance from Indian culture.

These views are polar opposites; and like all pairs of opposites, they share more in common than they like to admit. Both of them are concerned with *facts*, with whether these events were true or not. But the texts as we have them are not collections of facts, they are stories. And the significance of a story lies in its *meaning*. Whether a story is real or not is at best secondary, and often beside the point entirely. It engages an audience, provoking wonder, surprise, awe, or joy, and inspiring wisdom.

The Buddhist traditions understood this well, as evidenced by the textual situation. While in some cases the verses and story are tightly linked, it is very common for the same verse to be accompanied by completely different background narratives, or by no background at all. The verses convey the essential Dhamma teaching, the core of meaning and emotion, while the story varies. To insist on the factuality or otherwise of the story is to miss the point. The story provides a context that brings the teaching in the verses to life for an audience.

Thus the best lens through which to see such texts is neither as history nor as propaganda but as sacred story; that is, as myth. Each of the short suttas tells a story that conveys a timeless spiritual truth in a way that spoke to the audience of that time and place. They take place within a wider mythology that helps people find their place in a vast and unknown cosmos.

As always, the early Buddhist response to the earlier religious traditions is complex and nuanced. And, while it is true that many of the details of both literary form and subject matter are drawn from the Vedas, it is in the differences that the distinctively Buddhist character of the texts shows itself.

In the Vedas, the human agents are merely the transmitters of the sacred word of the gods. Exactly how this happened is unclear, but it probably involved a combination of drugs (*soma* is one of the great Vedic deities), ritual, creative inspiration, traditional lore, devotion, and communal empowerment, all of which inspired the sacred poets to heights of ecstatic visioning through which the words of the gods manifested. But regardless of the details, the key point is that the traditions regarded the human agent in the relationship as incidental, and the real value of the texts as stemming from the divine.

In the Buddhist texts, the situation is reversed. The gods do not inspire human hosts, they speak for themselves. And they are no infallible reserves of Truth; they may be right or wrong, skillful or foolish, just like anyone else. While the magnificence of their presence is emphasized, the ultimate effect is to show the worthlessness of such displays, for the gods are constantly being schooled by the Buddha. The most characteristic form of dialogue is where a god presents an idea that is pretty good, within in a limited, mundane (i.e. Vedic) world view, but which the Buddha elevates to an entirely new level.

It is an elementary fact of Buddhism that the gods are not metaphysical, in the sense that they do not exist in a separate realm governed by different principles than our own. On the contrary, they are impermanent and suffering, trapped in the cycle of transmigration just like us. It follows from this that they do not have access to any special form of knowledge or wisdom. Buddhists do not look to the gods for teachings; rather, the Buddha is “teacher of gods and humans”.

I have focused on the interactions with divine beings in this collection, as these are the most open to misunderstanding. But not all of the collections feature divine beings. Many of the collections feature kinds of people familiar from other texts of the time. And even when divine beings are involved, in the majority of cases, the verses themselves do not require a divine setting, as there’s nothing about the gods and their divine dramas in the verses themselves.

Some of the texts in this collection are well known and widely quoted, such as the invitation of Brahmā or the nun Vajirā’s simile of the person as a chariot. Most of the suttas here have parallels in the Chinese Saṁyukāgama translations; the partial translations SA-2 and SA-3 include Sagāthāvagga material. In addition, many of the verses have parallels elsewhere throughout the Buddhist literature in all languages.

## The Book of Causation

The Book of Causation (Nidānavagga) is the second of the five books of the Linked Discourses. It is named after the first and longest section, the Nidānasaṁyutta. This deals with causation through the core Buddhist teaching of dependent origination, which explains how rebirth happens without a soul. The next three <i>saṁyuttas</i> can be seen as appendices to the Book of Causation, dealing with the elimination of the suffering of transmigration (SN 13), various sets of conditioned elements (SN 14), and the unknowability of the extent of transmigration (SN 15). The remaining six  <i>saṁyuttas</i> are not related thematically. Instead, they are mostly grouped by person rather than subject.

The theme of causation runs through all the Buddha’s teaching. We find it in contexts such as meditation practice, societal ills, biological evolution, medicine, psychological stress, and many more. However, when we refer to dependent origination we are not speaking about a general principle of causality—although such a principle is presented at SN 12.21—but of a specific series of conditional links laying bare how suffering originates and how it ends. As such, it is an extended treatment of the second and third noble truths (SN 12.27). It integrates psychological and existential aspects of suffering, showing how, when bound by craving, we make choices that bind us to transmigrating into future lives (SN 12.38). The reason why we have not escaped the process of rebirth is that we do not understand dependent origination (SN 12.60). Thus one of the core purposes of the teaching is to explain how rebirth takes place without speaking in terms of “me” or “mine” (SN 12.37).

It is a deeply human need to want to understand how things came to be. Virtually every religious or spiritual path feels the need to offer some kind of explanation of where this world came from and what is our place in it. Such creation myths are found all over the world, and bear striking resemblances. They speak of a time when the world was formless, covered in a watery darkness, before light appeared and the world took shape. In the usual way of myths, these stories work at multiple levels, reflecting both the physical evolution of the planet (macrocosm) and the growth of an individual in the womb (microcosm).

Long before the Buddha, the Nasadiya Sukta of the Ṛg Veda (10.129) told the story of creation in a radically new way. It inherited the motifs of the classic creation myth—water, darkness, formlessness—but showed their development with a new emphasis on desire and agency. Creation evolved not from divine decree, but due to the energies found within. And we cannot know what came before this process; even the highest God came afterwards.

The Buddha inherited the epistemological humility of the Nasadiya Sukta, insisting that the ultimate origin of things was unknowable (SN 15.1). And it seems that the Nasadiya Sukta may have inspired the formulation of dependent origination, for many of the factors are closely parallel. But regardless of the historical relation between these teachings, the Buddha’s dependent origination took things much further, entirely dispensing with both theology and mythology. However, it retained the richness and depth of the mythology, containing within its sparse formulation an integrated explanation of both immediate experience and cosmic transmigration.

The Nidānasaṁyutta begins by stating (SN 12.1) and defining (SN 12.2) each of the terms in the standard 12-linked chain, definitions which are assumed to apply throughout. Remaining discourses iterate on this theme, introducing new perspectives and formulations. These sometimes vary the standard 12 links, and so can shed light on unexpected nuances and hidden depths. Nevertheless, the 12 links are without doubt the central presentation of this topic, and deserve close attention. A summary of the definitions given for the 12 links, together with some explanatory notes.

1. **Ignorance**  (*avijjā*): Not understanding the four noble truths.
 - This does not, of course, mean ignorance of everyday facts and details. A Buddha or an arahant is not omniscient.
2. **Choices** (*saṅkhārā*): Intentional acts (*kamma*) of good or bad, which are expressed through body, speech, or mind.
 - The Indic term *saṅkhāra* may refer to any kind of activity that generates a result. It is used in a mundane context for such things as construction work. The Vedic ritual is a *saṅkhāra*, which was intended to produce a result of benefit in this life or the next. In Buddhism, *saṅkhāra* is sometimes used in a general sense of “conditioned (and conditioning) phenomena”. In dependent origination, however, it is defined as moral choices or intentions to do good or bad (SN 12.51). A *saṅkhāra* is a force or energy in the mind that propels consciousness towards rebirth in a particular state. This may be consciously formulated as a wish or aspiration (see MN 120), but is normally unconscious, i.e. born out of ignorance.
3. **Consciousness** (*viññāṇa*): The six kinds of sense consciousness.
 - In the suttas, all forms of consciousness are regarded as making up the “stream of consciousness” (*viññāṇasota*) that is established both in this life and the next (DN 28). This consciousness is empowered and directed by the choices that we have made. Note that this differs from the later Theravadin Abhidhamma notion that consciousness here is the “rebirth-linking consciousness” (*paṭisandhi-viññāṇa*), for this refers purely to mental consciousness.
4. **Name & form** (*nāma-rūpa*): “Name” is various mental factors (feeling, perception, attention, contact, and intention), while “form” is the four material elements that make up the body.
  - This is a tricky concept. It stems from the Upanishads, where it is used in creation myths, referring to the various individuated entities that arise in the world, each with their own “form” and “name” (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.7, Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.3.2, 8.14.1). Each of the rivers on the earth has its own individual shape, and is called by its own name; but when they return to the ocean they lose their names and shapes and are just known as the great ocean (Praśna Upaniṣad 6.1.5). The ocean in this metaphor stands for the “person” made of pure consciousness, which in the Upanishads is taken to be the eternal and infinite divinity of the cosmos. The Buddha directly rebuts this idea by showing that consciousness and name & form are dependent on each other. In DN 15 Mahānidāna, name & form is described as the embryo taking shape within the mother’s womb, while MN 38 Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhaya speaks of how the child then grows and matures. Thus it primarily means the individual organism with its mental and physical attributes. Since *nāma-rūpa* stands in mutual dependence with consciousness, however, it is not appropriate to translate it as “mind & body”—mind/body dualism has no place in early Buddhism. It was only in much later Abhidhamma texts that *nāma-rūpa* came to be used as an umbrella term for all mental and physical properties, in which context the translation “mind & body” makes sense.
5. **Six sense fields** (*saḷāyatana*): The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
  - These are treated in detail in SN 35 Saḷāyatana Saṁyutta. In dependent origination they are said to develop and evolve as the individual grows up, enabling them to experience the world in ever more sophisticated ways. This link begins a series of four steps that, like consciousness, are six-fold following the six senses. These integrate the process of immediate sense experience within the broader context of dependent origination.
6. **Contact** (*phassa*): This is the operation of sense stimulus, when the six sense organs are activated and perform their function. It occurs with the coming together of the inner sense organ, the outer sense stimulus, and the corresponding consciousness.
  - The conscious individual does not exist in isolation, but can only live and grow in an environment that provides them with stimulation.
7.  **Feeling** (*vedanā*): The pleasant, painful, or neutral tone that accompanies all conscious experience.
  - Certain kinds of experience are enjoyable, others are unpleasant, while some have no particular affect. Note that *vedanā* in Buddhism does not refer to feelings in the sense of “emotions”, which are far more complex. *Vedanā* is a fundamental property of all experience, including humans and animals. Feelings are treated in detail in SN 36 Vedana Saṁyutta.
8. **Craving** (*taṇhā*): Craving or desire for the six sense stimuli.
  - Here the definition follows the theme of the six senses, rather than the definition given in the four noble truths, which is craving for future rebirth, i.e. sensual craving, craving for continued existence, and craving to end existence. In both cases craving refers to a primal instinct that responds to sense stimulus, seeking to get more pleasure or to avoid pain.
9. **Grasping** (*upādāna*): Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, religious observances, and theories of self.
  - Apart from the first factor, the kinds of grasping are more sophisticated than the simple desires listed under “craving”. They require the development of thought and language. This represents a further stage in the growth of a person, as they mature and become fully responsible for their actions. It is for this reason that in Buddhism it is primarily mature humans who perform the deeds that generate rebirth. Animals or children may indeed perform such deeds, but they are less weighty in effect.
10. **Continued existence** (*bhava*): Existence may be in the sensual realm (*kāma-bhava*), the realm of luminous form (*rūpa-bhava*), or the formless realm (*arūpa-bhava*).
  - *Bhava* may be translated as “existence” or “life”. It refers to the ongoing process of existence. By grasping at various aspects of the present life, beings generate kammic energy in accordance with that. Most beings are attached to the sensual realm, but those who have practiced advanced meditation may become attached to the realms of luminous form (through the four absorptions) or the formless (through the formless attainments). Such attachment or grasping stimulates and activates these aspects of existence, creating a corresponding rebirth. *Bhava* is therefore like a thread that runs through the various steps of dependent origination; and indeed, the whole of dependent origination is sometimes called the *bhavacakka*, the “Wheel of Existence”. *Bhava* is a countable noun, so the older rendering as “becoming” is incorrect: you can’t speak of multiple “becomings”. Nevertheless, *bhava* has a distinctly pregnant sense. While we might long for a life of stable and eternal joy, it is the nature of existence that, even as it passes away, it contains the seeds for the next life. Thus in AN 3.76 the Buddha explains *bhava* by saying that “deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture” (*kammaṃ khettaṃ, viññāṇaṃ bījaṃ, taṇhā sneho*) for generating a new life in the future (*āyatiṃ punabbhavābhinibbatti*).
11. **Rebirth** (*jāti*): The rebirth or conception of the aggregates in the various orders of sentient beings.
  - The Pali *jāti* is often translated as “birth”, but in doctrinal contexts it always refers to rebirth in the sense of reincarnation in a new life. *Contra* some modern commentators, it never refers to purely psychological rebirth.
12. **Old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress:** Old age is the breaking of teeth, wrinkling of skin, and failing of the faculties. Death is the laying down of the body at the end of life.
  - Like rebirth, old age and death are defined in purely physical terms. Psychological suffering is covered by the other terms.

Dependent origination is core to the insight not just of the historical Buddha Gotama, but of other Buddhas of the past (SN 12.4–10). His own realization was like a person who stumbles upon an ancient city, lost and overgrown in the jungle (SN 12.65). Thus dependent origination is not an invention of the Buddha, but is a description of a natural principle, one that operates in the same way whether or not a Buddha appears (SN 12.20).

The Buddha distinguished between the phenomena that are dependently originated and the process of dependent origination (SN 12.20). While all of the dependently originated phemomena can be seen in the present, the reality of the process in the past and future must be inferred (SN 12.34).

This is the difference between knowledge of dependent origination and the psychic powers of seeing the details of past lives and seeing the course of present rebirths. Such clairvoyant visions arise from deep immersion in meditation, and are useful but not essential for understanding and letting go. One with clairvoyant abilities is able to see the specifics of what happened in past lives, and how present deeds create future lives, a little like watching a story unfold on a television show. Dependent origination, on the other hand, explains the principles by which rebirth operates, like understanding the science and technology of how television transmission works. This is why dependent origination is always regarded as unique and central to Buddhism, while psychic visions have only a limited role to play.

This conscious body, with its complex systems of mental and physical processes, was produced due to ignorance and craving in a past life (SN 12.19). This is how our present existence came to be. So long as we continue to be trapped in craving for sensory experience, we repeat the cycle, fueling craving and generating yet another new body that will be reborn in the future. When we understand the theory of dependent origination as taught like this in the suttas, it gives us an opening for developing insight. It is, of course, self evident that all the factors of dependent origination may be observed in the present. But in terms of the functioning of the process, we begin by examining the central factors, the unfolding of sense experience. Gradually we realize that the implications of what we are seeing are far deeper than the mere present. Like a scientist who, examining tree rings or ice cores, realizes that they can make reliable inferences about the deep past, we understand that the same processes that brought us here will propel us into the future. And we see that it is that very understanding which is the beginning of the end for ignorance.

Thus while this teaching is a profoundly philosophical one, it is not mere theory, but a praxis as well (SN 12.3). Its understanding unfolds as a natural consequence of developing faith in the Dhamma (SN 12.23). It is realized by one who has experiential realization of the Dhamma, commonly known as a stream-enterer (SN 12.28). This is true for both monastics (SN 12.29) and lay people (SN 12.41). This is why a noble disciple has no doubts about the meaning or origin of life: they have seen it for themselves (SN 12.49). Such an individual is independent of others and need not rely on a teacher. One need not be a perfected one (*arahant*) to understand dependent origination (SN 12.68).

The Buddha illustrates dependent origination with many similes, the imagery often drawn from ideas of fire, fuel, or food. Focusing on things that give pleasure tends to stimulate craving, like a fire fueled by dry grass (SN 12.52) or a tree drawing up sap (SN 12.58). It is in this collection that we find the now-classic simile of the mind like a monkey, although the application is somewhat unexpected (SN 12.61).

A number of suttas take up the idea of conditionality as “food” or “fuel” or “sustenance” and apply it to a set of four things: solid food, contact, intention, and consciousness (SN 12.11). Each of these is, in turn, illustrated with similes that are as horrifying as they are unforgettable (SN 12.63).

While the standard presentation of the 12 links might give the impression that they occur one after the other, like a series of dominoes falling down, the reality is more complex. Certain factors, such as consciousness and name & form, are interdependent, relying on each other (SN 12.65) like two sheaves of reeds (SN 12.67). Sometimes a factor might be implied rather than mentioned outright (SN 12.13), sometimes the sequence is altered (SN 12.43 and SN 12.44), while elsewhere the teaching might be presented in a quite different way (SN 12.38). Conditionality in Buddhism is always understood to be complex and ramified: many causes, many effects, all interacting. The simple schema are not meant to be reductive, but to clarify crucial aspects of the process in a way that is easily memorized and understood.

Philosophically, dependent origination is said to be the “middle teaching” that avoids extreme views. Such extreme views are the polar opposites that often define philosophical positions. They include views of moral responsibility: is the person who does the deed identical with the one who experiences the result? Or is it experienced by a different person? The Buddha rejects these alternatives: the deed has an effect, and that effect is suffering (SN 12.46).

Similarly the Buddha rejects the ideas that “everything exists” or that “nothing exists” (SN 12.48). While these notions are odd, even bizarre, to our way of thinking, they rest on an Indian philosophical tendency which sees “being” as inherent, absolute, even divine. Thus if something exists it exists in an absolute and essential sense, and if all exists it means the reality of the cosmos itself is absolute and eternal. If nothing “exists”, it does not mean that there is nothing real in the world; it means that things do not have any essence, and hence will perish. Thus the Buddha rejects these opposing views as forms of eternalism and annihilationism, the ideas that the self will last forever, and that the self will be destroyed (SN 12.15).

Finally, perhaps the single most important thing to remember is that dependent “origination” is only half the picture. Of equal importance is “cessation”, the ending of each of the factors, which is what is called “extinguishment” (*nibbāna*). The true purpose of studying dependent origination is not for philosophical mastery, not for winning debates or passing a course, but for realizing the ending of suffering. Dependent origination stands as a truly empowering teaching, as it assumes that human understanding is quite sufficient to comprehend the essence of existence itself, to find salvation through wisdom.

## The Book of the Aggregates

The “Book of the Aggregates” is the third of the five books of the Linked Discourses. It is named after the first and longest <i>saṁyutta</i>, which deals with the core Buddhist teaching of the five aggregates in 159 discourses. Of the remaining twelve <i>saṁyuttas</i>, three also take up the theme of the aggregates, while the remainder deal with miscellaneous secondary themes, some organized by subject, others by person.

The “five grasping aggregates” (*pañc’upādānakkhandhā*) were mentioned in the first sermon as the summary of the noble truth of suffering, and became a foundational teaching in all forms of Buddhism.

The basic idea of an “aggregate” (*khandha*) is a set or class of phenomena. The “five aggregates” are the various sets of phenomena so classified.

The five aggregates are almost always said to be “grasping” aggregates. The term “grasping” (*upādāna*) has a complex and multi-layered relation to the basic term.

- The aggregates are the <em>subject</em> of grasping, in that they are the things that are normally attached to and taken to be the permanent “self”.
- But they are not merely passive spectators: they are also the <em>functional support</em> of grasping, the things that make grasping work. This is probably the basic metaphor of the set, as the five aggregates correspond to the five fingers of a hand, which perform the act of grasping. In this metaphor, the “thumb” is consciousness, which stands against the other four.
- As active participants in the process of grasping, they <em>stimulate</em> grasping to themselves (<i>upādāniya</i>).
- And finally, they are the <em>product</em> of grasping in the sense that attachments in past lives have given rise to the aggregates in this life (<i>upādiṇṇa</i>).

Here is a brief analysis of each of the five.

1. **Form** (<i>rūpa</i>): “Physical phenomena”, or sometimes simply “body”, understood as consisting of the four primary physical properties: earth (solid), water (liquidity), fire (heat), and air (gas), and anything material derived from these, such as the impressions of the five material senses.
  - *Rūpa* is more extensive in scope than the Western concept of “matter”. It includes material properties that are perceived purely in the mind, such as shape or color seen as visions in meditation.
2. **Feeling** (<i>vedanā</i>): The pleasant, painful, or neutral tone of experience, born from the six senses.
3. **Perception** (<i>saññā</i>): The recognition or interpretation of experience through the six senses.
  - Perception refers to that aspect of the mind which organizes the dizzyingly complex and chaotic input of present experience based on past experience. The eye, for example, does not see “blue” or “yellow”, it only sees light in various frequencies and amplitudes. Perception recognizes that these inputs correspond to the concept “blue” or “yellow” (SN 22.79), and hence enables us to live in a world of (relatively) permanent and predictable entities and ideas. While perception thus makes consciousness possible, it also can trap us into seeing things only in terms of the past. In the legal discussions of the Vinaya, it is common to discuss cases where a mendicant’s actions are based on a perception that turns out to be incorrect.
4. **Choices** (<i>saṅkhārā</i>): intention, will, or volition (*cetanā*); the choice to perform an act, especially one with an ethical dimension. It is choices that create the five aggregates (SN 22.79).
  - Later forms of Buddhism, starting with the Abhidhamma texts, treated this aggregate as if it were a catch-all, whose purpose was to include everything not mentioned under the under aggregates. However this is not the case in the early texts, where there is no indication that <i>saṅkhārā</i> in this context means anything other than “volition, choice”.
5. **Consciousness** (<i>vịññāṇa</i>): the subjective process of awareness itself.
  - As in dependent origination, consciousness is said to depend on name & form.

With the exception of perception, all of these are also found in dependent origination, where they have similar definitions. Whereas dependent origination shows the unfolding of the process of suffering in time, the teaching on the aggregates focuses on those aspects of present experience that are most apt to be taken as a self. In SN 12.5 the grasping to the aggregates is shown as the very same grasping that leads to rebirth as shown in dependent origination. SN 22.54 furthers this argument, asserting that it is impossible to speak of rebirth without referring to the aggregates.

From the very first teaching of the Buddha (SN 56.11) we learn that the aggregates are suffering. In the second sermon—the Discourse on Not-Self (Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta) at SN 22.59—this brief statement is drawn out in a further dialogue with the group of five ascetics. Each of the aggregates leads to affliction, and one cannot simply decree that the aggregates be whatever one wants; and hence they cannot be a self. Further, each of the aggregates is impermanent, and hence suffering, which again rules out the possibility that they are a self. Seeing in this way, a practitioner lets go of attachment to the aggregates and realizes freedom. It was while listening to this discourse that the five ascetics all became perfected ones.

While the doctrine of the “three marks” is found throughout all Buddhist texts, it is here in the Khandhasaṁyutta that it rises to prominence. Here is a brief outline.

- **Impermanence** (*anicca*): All conditioned phenomena are produced and maintained by causes and hence can only last so long as the causes sustain them. Impermanence is a fractal phenomena; it is how reality is structured at every level. It applies equally to the grandest scale of universes and the lifespans of the gods as it does to the incessant breaking up and vanishing of conditions from moment to moment. But in the five aggregates the main focus is on the scale of human existence, where the emotional impact of impermanence is felt most keenly in death.
- **Suffering** (*dukkha*): At its simplest level this refers to painful feelings, whether physical or mental (*dukkha-dukkhatā*). By itself this is a profound observation, as virtually every moment of our waking lives is afflicted by some form of pain or irritation. But suffering runs deeper than that, for even when we do experience pleasure, it cannot be sustained. The second bite of a mango is delicious—but not quite as delicious as the first (*vipariṇāma-dukkhatā*). Finally, even the most profound of pleasures, such as the bliss of deep meditation, is never as peaceful as *nibbāna*, since by its nature it is conditioned and unstable (*saṅkhāradukkhatā*).
- **Not-self** (*anattā*): The most subtle and distinctive of the three marks, not-self is the most apt to be misunderstood. It is primarily an anti-metaphysical doctrine, not a psychological one. It is intended to rule out the various kinds of self or soul proposed by the philosophers at the time of the Buddha. It does this by pointing out that all the self doctrines end up identifying one or other of the aggregates as self; but they do not have the nature that the self is supposed to have. This meaning is quite different from the modern psychological notion of self, and it is inappropriate, and potentially harmful, to apply the teaching of not-self in cases where a person is suffering from disorders of identity.

Let us dwell a little further on the idea of self and not-self, which is best understood in its historical context. From a few centuries before the Buddha, Indian sages and philosophers had become fascinated by the subjective nature of experience. They wondered who it was, in the true and ultimate sense, that was the one referred to as “I”.

Initial theories built on simple animist notions, imaging the self as an external physical totem, or even as a little man who lived in the chest. Others theorized that the self was the heart, or the breath, or some other physical attribute. But all of these may be refuted by simple empirical observation. Sometimes a totem may be destroyed, yet a person lives. When you watch a person who is asleep, no little man may be observed leaving by the mouth. And when a trumpeter expels all their breath, they do not drop down dead.

So what then is this self if not something material? Perhaps, rather, it is feeling, the bliss experienced by one who goes to a beautiful realm after death. But this cannot be so, for feeling, too, is impermanent (DN 15). Then could the self be perception (DN 1)? But no, perception too is tricky and unreliable, and changing. Is self then one’s choices? A man, after all, is defined by the decisions he makes. But these too are seen to be impermanent and unreliable; oft-times one makes bad choices, or the results of a choice are not what one hopes.

Finally the sages arrived at their most profound realization: the self in its highest sense was awareness itself, the sheer mass of consciousness (*vijnāna-ghanam’eva*). That is the true nature of the self, which it turns out, is the divine reality of the cosmos. This insight is expressed in the Upanishads as the famous “thou art that” (*tat tvam asi*), and the Pali texts as “I am that” (*eso hamasmi*), or more explicitly, “the self is identical with the cosmos”(*so attā so loko*). This profound conception is most closely associated with Yajnavalkya, a brahmanical sage who lived in the same region as the Buddha (Mithila), perhaps a century or two earlier.

While the exact form of these arguments may seem archaic, we still cling to the aggregates in similar ways. We think of our possessions and belongings—homes, clothes, cars—as expressions of our self, and are upset when they are damaged or criticized. We attach, too, to our physical bodies, reveling in health, or imagining that we will survive through the propagation of our DNA. We attach to pleasure, thinking that happiness will last. We attach to our perceptions, such as our sense of belonging to a nation or religion, or our idea of ourselves as a good person. We attach to our choices, taking pride in our ability to make decisions. Finally, we attach to our consciousness, especially as we purify awareness in meditation.

Thus one of the key functions of the aggregates was to categorize theories of the self. This seems to have familiar to people before the Buddha. The aggregates are mentioned in passing in the first sermon, as if it is taken for granted that the five ascetics would know them. Many of the sectarian views of self in DN 1 Brahmajala Sutta refer to the aggregates in one way or another. And elsewhere, the non-Buddhist ascetic Saccaka asserted that the five aggregates were the self (MN 35). Nevertheless, the aggregates have not been identified in any pre-Buddhist texts.

Regardless of whether the set of categories was pre-Buddhist, the Buddha treated them in his own distinctive way, emphasizing that when examined, the aggregates turn out to lack the qualities of permanence, surety, and refuge that are intrinsic to the idea of a true self. But our grasping and identification are strong and have been built up over a long time, so it is not enough to merely acknowledge this on an intellectual level. Hence in the Khandhasaṁyutta we find the core teachings emphasized again and again. The Buddha constantly reminds the mendicants that the aggregates lead to sorrow and despair (SN 22.7), that they are aggravating (SN 22.79), that desire for them must be given up (SN 22.137), that they are alien (SN 22.33). One who identifies with the aggregates is like a man who hires an assassin as a servant (SN 22.85). The entire collection, in fact, can be seen as a blueprint for insight meditation (*vipassanā*).

The view that the aggregates are self is called “identity view” (*sakkāya diṭṭhi*). It is possible to identify with any or all of the aggregates in a myriad of ways, commonly set out as twenty forms of identity view (SN 22.1, etc.). Identity view leashes an unenlightened person to transmigration like a dog tied to a post, pointlessly running around and around (SN 22.99).

In this collection we find a large number of striking and lively narratives, showing how the aggregates could be a solace at the time of death, a guide to the knotty theoretical debates on identity, or a framework for insight meditation.

Many of the short abbreviated texts are built from the same templates employed in the “Linked Discourses on the Six Sense Fields”. These templates were treated in detail by Bhikkhu Bodhi in the introduction to his <cite>Connected Discourses</cite>, to which the serious reader is referred.

## The Book of the Six Sense Fields

The “Book of the Six Sense Fields” is the fourth of the five books of the Linked Discourses. It is named after the first and longest <i>saṁyutta</i>, which deals with the core Buddhist teaching of the six sense fields. The second <i>saṁyutta</i> on Feelings also deals with a major doctrinal topic. The remaining eight <i>saṁyuttas</i> deal with miscellaneous secondary themes, some organized by subject, others by person.

The number of discourses in the “Linked Discourses on the Six Sense Fields” varies between editions, mainly due to the way repetitions are counted; SuttaCentral follows Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation in counting 248 discourses. The six sense fields complement the five aggregates as the summary of the noble truth of suffering. Where the aggregates focus on the functional structure of experience as basis for views of self, the emphasis here is on how sense experience stimulates desire. Despite this difference in orientation, the two collections share much in common, and often the exact same template is applied in both cases. The six sense fields are the means through which the world is known, and so each of them has an “inner” and an “outer” aspect—the “eye” and “sights”, etc. Though common, it’s best to avoid thinking of the external sense field as the “object”, since in the suttas they are depicted in relation to the observing mind, and not as independently existing entities. This is straightforward until we come to the last sense, the “mind” and “thoughts” or “mental phenomena”. Just to clear up a possible confusion, this “sixth sense” is simply the mental faculty, and has nothing to do with psychic powers. The outer aspect is <i>dhammā</i>, a term so ambiguous its translation is always difficult. Here it refers to anything that may be known directly by the mind, distinct from the six senses. The most technically correct translation is probably “mental phenomena”, but “thought’ may be used as a more colloquial rendering, so long as it includes ideas, imagination, and so on, not just verbalized cognition.

## The Great Book

The “Great Book” is the last and largest of the five books of the Linked Discourses. It consists of twelve <i>saṁyuttas</i>, almost all of which deal with an aspect of Buddhist practice, or the path. The first of these, indeed, is the “Section on the Path” (<i>Maggasaṁyutta</i>), and in the northern canons the book as a whole is referred to as the “Book of the Path” (<i>Maggavagga</i>). The first seven of the <i>saṁyuttas</i> treat the familiar set of seven groups of factors on Buddhist practice known to the later traditions as the <i>bodhipakkhiyā dhammā</i>, or “qualities leading to awakening”. This book is the primary source for these teachings. Subsequent <i>saṁyuttas</i> deal with the path from different perspectives, while the final two deal with stream-entry and the four noble truths respectively.

## A Brief Textual History

The Saṁyutta Nikāya was edited by M. Léon Feer on the basis of manuscripts in Sinhalese and Burmese scripts, and published in Latin script by the Pali Text Society from 1884 to 1898. The first translation followed in 1917–30 by Mrs C.A.F. Rhys Davids (vols. 1–2) and F.L. Woodward (vols. 3–5) under the title <cite>The Book of the Kindred Sayings</cite>. In 1999 the PTS issued a new edition of the Pali text of vol. 1 Sagāthāvagga, edited by G.A. Somaratne.

While several partial translations were subsequently made, there was no complete new translation in English until 2002, when Bhikkhu Bodhi published his <cite>Connected Discourses of the Buddha</cite>. As with his translation of the <cite>Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha</cite>, this constituted a major leap forward, essentially rendering the earlier translation obsolete. Unlike the <cite>Middle Length Discourses</cite>, however, this was an entirely new translation. In an extensive introduction, Bhikkhu Bodhi spelled out his evolving approach to translation and presented a detailed thematic and structural analysis of the text.

Where the Pali was unclear I frequently referred to the earlier work of Bodhi, and rarely to Woodward/Rhys Davids and various translations of specific texts.
